[Multiscale Co-Design Analysis of Energy, Latency, Area, and Accuracy
of a ReRAM Analog Neural Training Accelerator]

M. J. Marinella, S. Agarwal, A. Hsia, I. Richter, R. Jacobs-Gedrim,
J. Niroula, S. J. Plimpton, E. Ipek, C. D. James, IEEE Journal on
Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, 8, 86-101
(2018).

Neural networks are an increasingly attractive algorithm for natural
language processing and pattern recognition. Deep networks with >50 M
parameters are made possible by modern graphics processing unit
clusters operating at <50 pJ per op and more recently, production
accelerators are capable of <5 pJ per operation at the board
level. However, with the slowing of CMOS scaling, new paradigms will
be required to achieve the next several orders of magnitude in
performance per watt gains. Using an analog resistive memory (ReRAM)
crossbar to perform key matrix operations in an accelerator is an
attractive option. This paper presents a detailed design using the
state-of-the-art 14/16 nm process development kit for of an analog
crossbar circuit block designed to process three key kernels required
in training and inference of neural networks. A detailed circuit and
device-level analysis of energy, latency, area, and accuracy are given
and compared with relevant designs using standard digital ReRAM and
static random access memory (SRAM) operations. It is shown that the
analog accelerator has 270x energy and 540x latency advantage over a
similar block utilizing only digital ReRAM and takes only 11 fJ per
multiply and accumulate. Compared with an SRAM-based accelerator, the
energy is 430x better and latency is 34x better. Although training
accuracy is degraded in the analog accelerator, several options to
improve this are presented. The possible gains over a similar
digital-only version of this accelerator block suggest that continued
optimization of analog resistive memories is valuable. This detailed
circuit and device analysis of a training accelerator may serve as a
foundation for further architecture-level studies.


Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
