[Oxygen Modulates the Effectiveness of Granuloma Mediated Host
Response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis: A Multiscale Computational
Biology Approach]

C. L. Sershen, S. J. Plimpton, E. E. May, Frontiers in Cellular and
Infection Microbiology, 6, doi:10.3389/fcimb.2016.00006 (2016).

Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) is the second most lethal pathogen
after HIV [1]. In response to the invading Mtb, the body can develop
tightly packed layers of immune cell structures, often in the lungs,
called granulomas. Infection associated granuloma formation can be
viewed as a structural im- mune response that can contain and halt the
spread of the pathogen. While a presumed consequence, the structural
contribution of the granuloma to oxygen limitation and the concomitant
impact on Mtb metabolic viability and persistence remains to be fully
explored.  In several mammalian hosts, including non-human primates,
Mtb granulomas are believed to be hypoxic, although this has not been
observed in murine infection models [2]. We develop a multi-scale
computa- tional model to test to what extent in vivo Mtb granulomas
become hypoxic in humans, and investigate the effects of hypoxia on
host immune response efficacy and mycobacterial persistence. Our study
inte- grates a model of oxygen diffusion in the extracellular space of
alveolar tissue, an agent-based model of cellular immune response, and
a systems biology-based model of Mtb intracellular dynamics. We incor-
porate the physiological dynamics and effects of oxygen availability
in two ways: cellular consumption and consequential changes in
extracellular levels of oxygen; Mtb respiration and metabolism
associated growth while in the extracellular compartment as well as
growth post phagocytosis. Our theoretical studies suggest that the
dynamics of oxygen availability mediates granuloma organization and
illustrates the immunological contribution of this structural host
response to infection outcome. Furthermore, our integrated model
demonstrates the link between structural immune response and
mechanistic drivers influencing Mtb's adaptation to its changing
microenvironment and the qualitative infection outcome scenarios:
clearance, containment and dissemination. We observed hypoxic regions
in the containment granuloma similar in size to granulomas found in
mammalian models of Mtb infection. In the case of the containment
outcome, our model uniquely demonstrated that immune response mediated
hypoxic (low oxygen) conditions help foster the shift down of bacteria
through the two stages of adaptation similar to the in vitro
non-replicating persistence (NRP) stages observed in the Wayne model
of Mtb dormancy.  The adaptation in part helps explain the ability of
the pathogen to remain dormant for years and decades after initial
infection.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
