[Carbon Sequestration in Synechococcus Sp.: From Molecular Machines to
Hierarchical Modeling]

G. S. Heffelfinger, ..., S. J. Plimpton, ..., OMICS - A Journal of
Integrative Biology, 6, 305-330 (2002).

The US Department of Energy recently announced the first five grants
for the Genomes to Life (GTL) Program. This goal of this program is to
“achieve the most far-reaching of all biological goals: a fundamental,
comprehensive, and systematic understanding of life.” While more
information about the program can be found at the GTL website
(www.doegenomestolife.org), this paper provides an overview of one of
the five GTL projects just funded: “Carbon Sequestration in
Synechococcus Sp.: From Molecular Machines to Hierarchical Modeling.”

This project is a combined experimental and computational effort
emphasizing developing, prototyping, and applying new computational
tools and methods to ellucidate the biochemical mechanisms of the
carbon sequestration of Synechococcus Sp., an abundant marine
cyanobacteria known to play an important role in the global carbon
cycle. Understanding, predicting, and perhaps manipulating carbon
fixation in the oceans has long been a major focus of biological
oceanography and has more recently been of interest to a broader
audience of scientists and policy makers. It is clear that the oceanic
sinks and sources of CO2 are important terms in the global
environmental response to anthropogenic atmospheric inputs of CO2 and
that oceanic microorganisms play a key role in this response. However,
the relationship between this global phenomenon and the biochemical
mechanisms of carbon fixation in these microorganisms is poorly
understood.

The project includes five subprojects: an experimental investigation,
three computational biology efforts, and a fifth which deals with
addressing computational infrastructure challenges of relevance to
this project and the Genomes to Life program as a whole. Our
experimental effort is designed to provide biology and data to drive
the computational efforts and includes significant investment in
developing new experimental methods for uncovering protein partners,
characterizing protein complexes, identifying new binding domains. We
will also develop and apply new data measurement and statistical
methods for analyzing microarray experiments. Our computational
efforts include coupling molecular simulation methods with knowledge
discovery from diverse biological data sets for high-throughput
discovery and characterization of protein-protein complexes and
developing a set of novel capabilities for inference of regulatory
pathways in microbial genomes across multiple sources of information
through the integration of computational and experimental
technologies. These capabilities will be applied to Synechococcus
regulatory pathways to characterize their interaction map and identify
component proteins in these pathways. We will also investigate methods
for combining experimental and computational results with
visualization and natural language tools to accelerate discovery of
regulatory pathways. Furthermore, given that the ultimate goal of this
effort is develop a systems-level of understanding of how the
Synechococcus genome affects carbon fixation at the global scale, we
will develop and apply a set of tools for capturing the carbon
fixation behavior of complex of Synechococcus at different levels of
resolution. Finally, because the explosion of data being produced by
high-throughput experiments requires data analysis and models which
are more computationally complex, more heterogeneous, and require
coupling to ever increasing amounts of experimentally obtained data in
varying formats, we have also established a companion computational
infrastructure to support this effort as well as the Genomes to Life
program as a whole.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
