[Transient Dynamics Simulations: Parallel Algorithms for Contact
Detection and Smoothed Particle Hydrodynamics]

S. J. Plimpton, S. Attaway, B. Hendrickson, J. Swegle, C. Vaughan,
D. Gardner, in Proc of SuperComputing '96, Pittsburgh, PA, November
1996.

Transient dynamics simulations are commonly used to model phenomena
such as car crashes, underwater explosions, and the response of
shipping containers to high-speed impacts. Physical objects in such a
simulation are typically represented by Lagrangian meshes because the
meshes can move and deform with the objects as they undergo
stress. Fluids (gasoline, water) or fluid-like materials (soil) in the
simulation can be modeled using the techniques of smoothed particle
hydrodynamics. Implementing a hybrid mesh/particle model on a
massively parallel computer poses several difficult challenges. One
challenge is to simultaneously parallelize and load-balance both the
mesh and particle portions of the computation. A second challenge is
to efficiently detect the contacts that occur within the deforming
mesh and between mesh elements and particles as the simulation
proceeds. These contacts impart forces to the mesh elements and
particles which must be computed at each timestep to accurately
capture the physics of interest. In this paper we describe new
parallel algorithms for smoothed particle hydrodynamics and contact
detection which turn out to have several key features in
common. Additionally, we describe how to join the new algorithms with
traditional parallel finite element techniques to create an integrated
particle/mesh transient dynamics simulation. Our approach to this
problem differs from previous work in that we use three different
parallel decompositions, a static one for the finite element analysis
and dynamic ones for particles and for contact detection. We have
implemented our ideas in a parallel version of the transient dynamics
code PRONTO-3D and present results for the code running on a large
Intel Paragon.

Return to "Publications page"_../papers.html
